Is it agentic enough? Benchmarking open models on your own tooling (#3422)
huggingface/blog: is-it-agentic-enough.md

needs to be agent-optimized if we want it to be leveraged by agents.

Most benchmarks focus on "can the agent get the right answer?". Here, we will introduce a tool specific benchmark 
focusing on how the model got the answer; and provide a simple implementation of one such harness for the open-source 
ecosystem.

<br/>
<p align="center">
    But, <b><i>how do you optimize software for agents?</i></b>
</p>
<br/>

We're strong believers in the following two software principles:

- If it isn't tested, then it doesn't work
- If it isn't documented, then it doesn't exist

This remains the same within the realm of agentic-optimized tooling, and, for once, the two are directly tied to
each other.

You want your tool to exist for an agent: it needs to be discoverable. The API needs to be clear and the docs
need to be extensive. They need to be structured in a way that the agent has rapid access to the useful files and
examples. If you want your tool to work for an agent, then you should test it for agentic-use. 

## Testing software for agentic-use

We'll use `transformers` as an example throughout this blogpost, but this harness was designed to work with any tool which 

> can be operated from the command line. Our intuition on `transformers` was that it could be dramatically simplified

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can be operated from the command line. Our intuition on `transformers` was that usage could be dramatically simplified
```

with a few changes: a CLI, a Skill, and self-contained, task-specific examples.

Unfortunately, intuition isn't sufficient as the sole driver of agentic features, especially not to warrant large PRs 

> adding several thousand lines of code to such a widely used tool as `transformers`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Intuition is a powerful tool, but we wanted more evidence before we opened PRs that add several thousand lines of code to such a widely used codebase as `transformers`. We set out to measure what success looks like.
```

(The original had a somewhat negative / defensive vibe to my eyes).

Both reach `POSITIVE (0.9999)`, and here are the two paths an agent actually took on this exact task:

```diff
# Task: classify the sentiment of "I absolutely loved the movie, it was fantastic!"

- # one agent: install deps, write a script, run it, parse the output
- from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForSequenceClassification
- import torch
- import torch.nn.functional as F
-
- model = AutoModelForSequenceClassification.from_pretrained("distilbert/distilbert-base-uncased-finetuned-sst-2-english")
- tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("distilbert/distilbert-base-uncased-finetuned-sst-2-english")
- inputs = tokenizer("I absolutely loved the movie, it was fantastic!", return_tensors="pt")
- with torch.no_grad():
-     logits = model(**inputs).logits
- probs = F.softmax(logits, dim=1)
- idx = torch.argmax(probs, dim=1).item()
- print(model.config.id2label[idx], probs[0][idx].item())

+ # the other agent: one command
+ transformers classify \
+   --model distilbert/distilbert-base-uncased-finetuned-sst-2-english \
+   --text "I absolutely loved the movie, it was fantastic!"
```

Depending on the model used, it's likely that the two amount to the same result. Still,

> you'll see different **cost, latency, token usage, and failures**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both methods reach the same result. But they have very different profiles in **cost, latency, token usage, and failures**.
```

If your evaluation only checks the final string, you're blind to these as well as
whether a change you shipped to the library (a CLI improvement, better error messages, a
Skill) actually helped agents.

This is what we're trying to do with this harness: we want to evaluate how much work
an agent had to do a given task, and what changes can be done to the library to help

> them out.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our goal with this harness is to evaluate how much work
an agent has to do to perform a given task, and measure what changes to the library actually help
them out.
```

> ### How do we run evaluations?

Reviewer: Maybe at some point in the intro we could clarify that this is about using transformers to solve ML tasks, not about contributing code to it. I'll get back to it later.

Author: addressed in 070747bd

A few words on how we'll evaluate agents here.

> We run every task under three variants, increasing how much help the agent gets to drive `transformers`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We run every task under three variants (or "tiers"), increasing how much help the agent gets to drive `transformers`:
```

```text
less help  ───────────────────────────────────────────▶  more help

bare                  clone                   skill
────                  ─────                   ─────
pip install           git clone the repo      a packaged Skill: the
transformers,         into the working dir    CLI's docs + task
nothing else          (source at hand)        examples, in-context

> ```

Reviewer 2: (coming back to this after reading the full blogpost) I feel like "more help"/"less help" labeling is misleading because it's like saying "skill gives the agent at least everything clone does, plus more" but it's not the case for small models (skill is worse than "clone" tier)

Author: Addressed in a39b5317

A few more choices:

- For now we only focus on tasks which can provide an exact match: it is deterministic, and provides a very nice 

>   ground for experimentation. Model-as-a-judge and other schemes are the obvious next step for other tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For now we only focus on deterministic tasks which can provide an exact match, as they provide a very nice ground for experimentation. Model-as-a-judge and other schemes are the obvious next steps for other tasks.
```

Reviewer 2: worth mentioning as a scope limitation that every task is 1 shot inference with a single canonical answer (classify, fill-mask, tokenize, image-classify), exactly the shape a `transformers <subcommand>` one liner is built for. cases where a CLI wouldn't help (fine-tuning, training loops, multi-step pipelines) aren't represented

Reviewer: There are some multi-step tasks too, but I agree that it could be useful to scope the capabilities we are evaluating.

- We'll run using Hugging Face Jobs so as to provide an identical environment for all jobs with very high concurrency
- We'll run using Hugging Face Buckets as a storage option: fast, no versioning, high write concurrency

### Which models to benchmark against?

> Not all models are equal, and their difference changes what you should look at when running them.

Reviewer: Maybe clarify that these are the models used by the agent, not the ones that run in the transformers tasks.

Author: addressed in 070747bd

*Frontier*

At one end, you have the big, frontier models. On reasonably common tasks,
these should get the right answer, eventually. For them, __"match %"__ saturates near
100% and stops telling you much about your tool; a more interesting benchmark is the effort
it took the agent to get there: how many turns, tokens and seconds it took, and whether they walked a clean
path or used deprecated APIs.

> *Local*

Reviewer: Maybe use "Frontier closed models" vs "Open models", which can include local and API-based options?

Reviewer: Ah, I see all the models we use are open. Then disregard this comment, but I'd enumerate them early, perhaps here.

Author: yes sounds good! I wanted to keep using only local models in this blogpost as I feel like it sends a strong statement: of course open models can be used, but let's see how to leverage them best. I'll update the intro to that effect.

Author: addressed in 070747bd

> At the other end are the local models. Their size varies greatly, and so do their abilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Local models vary widely in size, and so do their abilities.
```

I'd remove "at the other end" as this sounds like we are equating "local/open == bad".

Reviewer 2: these are open models served via Inference Providers and not local weights right ? maybe let's use "Larger open models" and "Smaller open models". local can be misleading and we might think that the benchmark was done with models running locally.

Metrics such as __"match %"__ are way more interesting than for their larger counterparts,
as you can see how model sizes/capabilities affect the different models on your specific

> tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metrics such as __"match %"__ are way more interesting than for their larger counterparts,
as you can see how model sizes/capabilities affect results on your specific
tool.
```

Not sure what the second `model` refers to.

On top of guiding you as a library maintainer on how to update
your repository for agents to interact better with it, it's also useful for you as a user:
if designing agentic workflows or choosing a model for them, you now have a harness to directly

> evaluate each of them on a set of tools directly related to the task you want to evaluate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This harness not only provides you guidance, as a library maintainer, on how to update your repository so that agents can better interact with it; it also helps assess how different agents and models perform on the tasks your users care about.
```

perhaps?

The harness scores every run on several axes, so that you can ask what actually matters
for each class of model:

- **match %**: did the final answer contain the expected result (per-task,
  case-insensitive substring / regex / exact, all explicit in the report);
- **median time** and **median tokens** (new vs. cached vs. generated);
- **runs with error %**: including a guard that flags runs which produced *nothing*
  (0 output tokens, no tool calls, no answer) so silent failures don't masquerade
  as "0";

> - **label adoption**: tool-defined behavior markers; see below for an explanation

Reviewer 2: nit
```suggestion
- **marker adoption**: tool-defined behavior markers; see below for an explanation
```

  of what this is.

> All of it lands in a single static report you can take a look at yourself:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All of it lands in a extensive report you can examine:
```

<p align="center">
<iframe
	src="https://transformers-community-is-transformers-agentic.static.hf.space"
	frameborder="0"
	width="850"
	height="450"
></iframe>
<br>
  <em>The live report: Overview, Coverage, and Results, all client-side.

>   (Not loading? <a href="https://lysandre-transformers-agentic-use-report.static.hf.space">open it in a new tab</a>.)</em>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  (Not loading? <a href="https://transformers-community-is-transformers-agentic.static.hf.space">open it in a new tab</a>.)</em>
```

> </p>

Reviewer: Maybe also add a couple of screenshots that show some nice results; the space is quite extensive and can get some time for people to interact with it.

Because it captures the native agent trace of every run, you can also just read what happened, and the traces are 

> shareable through the Hub's [agent-traces viewer](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/agent-traces).

Reviewer: I would link to some traces here. However, for some reason it's not auto-detecting them as traces for me: https://huggingface.co/buckets/lysandre/transformers-agentic-use/tree/traces/22404f7951/pi/MiniMaxAI--MiniMax-M2.7/audio-classify.jsonl

Author: thanks, this is the case now!

> Those two classes call for two different experiments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The two model categories call for two different experiments.
```

### Frontier models: hold the model, vary the tool

Since a frontier model will usually get to the correct result, what you're really
measuring is the effort it took to do so. Did it take ten turns or one? Did it follow
an API path you deprecated because it trusted obsolete documentation? Did it hit an
error you hadn't foreseen?

The natural experiment is to **fix one strong model and vary the tool's
revisions**, watching whether the load it puts on the agent goes up or down. We used
the harness on `transformers` exactly this way, to check whether adding a dedicated

> CLI and Skill actually lightened the agents' work.

Reviewer: We haven't defined what `revision` means here; maybe would be useful to clarify at some point.

Author: Addressed. in 6400c344

> For the three large models we used in this example, the average seems to indicate that the Skill commit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the three large models we used in our tests, the average time spent on all tasks indicates that the Skill commit
```

results in less time spent working on the tasks:

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/is-it-agentic-enough/img_8.png" alt="GLM-5.1, Kimi K2.6, and MiniMax 2.7 time spent working on the tasks" width="85%"><br>
  <em>GLM-5.1, Kimi K2.6, and MiniMax 2.7 time spent working on the tasks</em>
</p>

On the other hand, in the experiments in which we cloned the repository, we can see a significant increase

> in token consumption due to the introduction of this commit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, in the experiments in which we cloned the repository, we can see a significant increase
in token consumption due to the commit that introduced the CLI and examples, as we'll see in a moment.
```

<p align="center">

>   <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/is-it-agentic-enough/img_9.png" alt="Token usage on the clone variant across revisions (GLM-5.1, Kimi K2.6, MiniMax 2.7)" width="85%"><br>

Reviewer: I think we need the curve labels in these screenshots (i.e., blue means "clone", gray is "bare") to make it less confusing.

Author: Addressed in 84f20b5f

  <em>Token usage on the clone variant across revisions</em>
</p>

> Reading the clone-variant traces explains why. The commit adds a command, but it also ships the

Reviewer: a link would be great if we can

Author: done!

CLI's implementation and a set of `cli/agentic/*.py` usage examples into the repository directly. 

> On the `clone`variant the agent has that checkout in front of it, and roughly a third of the runs go read the new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the `clone` variant the agent has a full transformers checkout in front of it, and roughly a third of the runs go read the new
```

surface (the `/cli/` tree and the example scripts) to learn the interface before calling it. This results
in a higher median input tokens from ~4k to ~6.4k. 

The two charts are then two sides of one tradeoff: the commit buys the large models less time 
(they reach for the CLI instead of debugging Python) at the cost of more
tokens (they read the code that taught them the CLI). A tradeoff worth knowing about before merging PRs.

> 

Reviewer: I'd add a note here about this cost being amortized across future requests. In real-world usage, agents would learn about the CLI once, and then users can ask about multiple tasks to be solved. Our setup, on the other hand, is designed for one-off experiments.

Author: Addressed in f955dbf6

---

### Small models: hold the tool, vary the model

> Open models give you a knob the closed APIs don't: granular control over size,

Reviewer: Now the distinction open / closed becomes a bit confusing again.

Author: Addressed in a39b5317

configuration, provider, training, among others. They're also where a good tool surface

> matters most: a small model asked to "use `transformers` to do X" on a `bare` checkout can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
matters most: a small model asked to "use `transformers` to do X" on a `bare` environment can
```

guess an API that changed some releases ago, may do unnecessary tool calls, and can
get the wrong answer.

So here the experiment is the opposite of the above: hold the tool and sweep the model. This helps
see which models actually take care of the task, not just by token count and time,
but down to which ones can't reliably handle the tool calls. Our intuition is
that the smaller the model, the harder both tool use and the task get; we ran the

> harness across a range of model sizes to test exactly that:

Reviewer: Maybe use `revision` instead of `tool` here? Tool is loaded.

Author: Addressed in a39b5317

<p align="center">

>   <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/is-it-agentic-enough/img.png" alt="Models swept across sizes on a single tool revision" width="85%"><br>

Reviewer: Again, labels would be helpful imo.

Author: Addressed in 84f20b5f

a run. 

It is a one-line label for a behavior you care about, checked against the shell
commands the agent ran, the code it wrote, the files it read, or its final
answer. A run can fire several markers or none; the report shows how often each one fired,
per model and per revision.

For `transformers` we declare a handful but we'll only look at the two most relevant ones:

- **`cli`**: the agent invoked the `transformers` command-line tool (e.g.
  `transformers classify …`) instead of writing Python.
- **`pipeline`**: it reached for the high-level `pipeline(...)` Python API.

These are what we watch to see whether a change actually shifted the agent's behavior.

Averaging across all models, the results are particularly interesting:

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/is-it-agentic-enough/img_4.png" alt="CLI adoption across all models" width="85%"><br>
  <em>CLI adoption across all models</em>
</p>

CLI adoption is new: the CLI lands in a single commit, isn't in any model's training data, and is only
lightly documented. The effect is clear: it's the Skill variant, the one that ships the CLI's

> documentation, that actually reaches for it, at 55.3%.

Reviewer: Only 55%? I guess it's larger in larger models.

### Is the CLI + Skill commit helping?

Comparing the commit across model sizes, the CLI + Skill helps the bigger
models: Kimi and the other large agents reach for the CLI, finish in fewer turns,

> and burn fewer tokens:

Reviewer 2: maybe this is amore accurate claim?
```suggestion
Comparing the commit across model sizes, the CLI + Skill helps the bigger models: on the `skill` tier, Kimi and the other large agents reach for the CLI and finish in fewer turns. (On `clone` they spend *more* input tokens first - reading the new CLI code, as we saw above - so the win shows up in time and turns, not raw tokens.)
```

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/is-it-agentic-enough/img_5.png" alt="Kimi-K2.6, GLM-5.1, and MiniMax-M2.7 across revisions" width="85%"><br>
  <em>Kimi-K2.6, GLM-5.1, and MiniMax-M2.7 across revisions</em>
</p>

But it somehow seems to **hurt the smaller models**. Our intuition is that small models lean
on memorized API patterns, therefore reproducing `pipeline(...)` snippets
they've seen in their training data. The new concepts are therefore a larger
surface for them to get wrong. You can watch this directly on the harness: lower
match %, more retries, the `cli` marker barely firing (`[[fill in: small-model

> numbers]]`), particularly striking on the Qwen 4B model:

Reviewer: I'd maybe just mention the "upskill" blog post here; no need to run experiments imo but could be interesting to provide as a hint for users that wish to drive small models to the max.

Author: mentioned!

> numbers]]`), particularly striking on the Qwen 4B model:

Reviewer 2: there is also a placeholder to fill
```suggestion
surface for them to get wrong. You can watch this directly on the harness: lower
match %, more retries, the `cli` marker barely firing (`[[fill in: small-model
numbers]]`), particularly striking on the Qwen3-4B model:
```

> <p align="center">
>   <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/is-it-agentic-enough/img_7.png" alt="Qwen3-4B across revisions" width="85%"><br>
>   <em>Qwen3-4B across revisions</em>
> </p>

Reviewer 2: I feel like the captions are a bit vague
```suggestion
<p align="center">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/is-it-agentic-enough/img_7.png" alt="Qwen3-4B time and token distributions across revisions" width="85%"><br>
  <em>Qwen3-4B time and token distributions across revisions</em>
</p>
```

Reading the traces shows how the extra surface backfired. Let's look at Qwen3-14B directly: adding the Skill drops its
overall match rate from 49% (bare) to 32%, and on the simplest tasks the collapse is total:
`classify-sentiment` goes from 100% on the `clone` variant to **0%** with the Skill. 

Looking at the traces, the model treats `transformers` as a tool (as in, an agentic harness tool, like web-search).

> In 39 of its 56 Skill runs it either emits a `transformers(command="classify", ...)` call (a tool that doesn't exist), 

Reviewer: Is this because we refer to the CLI in the Skill as a `tool`? (I haven't checked)

Reviewer 3: I’d explicitly say that the Skill is not itself an executable tool though

since the CLI is meant to be run in the shell, or, finding nothing like it among its `read`/`bash`/`edit`/`write` tools,
simply reasons that it *can't* run a model and gives up. Either way, rather than fall back to the one-line
`pipeline(...)` that scored 100% on the `clone` checkout, it declares the task impossible.

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/is-it-agentic-enough/img_10.png" alt="Qwen3-14B gives up on classify-sentiment under the Skill variant" width="85%"><br>
  <em>Qwen3-14B on classify-sentiment (Skill variant): it reasons that read/bash/edit/write can't run a model, and gives up.</em>
</p>

Unfortunately the Skill resulted in adding another, new interface which the model misread.

## Trying it yourself

The harness is one CLI, `ag`. Install it, run a suite, fan it out across models × revisions on HF Jobs, and publish the
report as a Hugging Face Space. 

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The harness is one CLI, `ag`. Install it, run a suite, fan it out across models × revisions on HF Jobs, and publish the
report as a Hugging Face Space. 

> [!TIP]
> ⚠️ **Trusted local use only.** The harness runs a coding agent with bypassed permissions and executes code from
> whatever revision you point it at, and traces can contain prompts, output, and local paths. See
> [SECURITY.md](https://github.com/huggingface/is-it-agentic-enough/blob/main/SECURITY.md) before pointing it at code you didn't write or sharing results.
```

> The full, kept-current setup and usage instructions live in the [README](https://github.com/huggingface/is-transformers-agentic-enough).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The full, kept-current setup and usage instructions live in the [README](https://github.com/huggingface/is-it-agentic-enough).
```

## Closing

Checking the final answer tells you whether an agent *can* use your library. It
doesn't tell you what it costs: the turns, tokens, errors, and the path it took to
get there. This harness measures that, across the revisions and models you pick.

On `transformers`, it caught something we'd have shipped on faith: the CLI + Skill
helps frontier models and hurts the smallest ones. Worth knowing before merging!

It's profile-based, and designed to be adaptable: point it at your own library, define
a few tasks and their expected answers, get the same report. Code and tasks are in

> the [repo](https://github.com/huggingface/is-transformers-agentic-enough), traces are on the Hub!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the [repo](https://github.com/huggingface/is-it-agentic-enough), traces are on the Hub!
```

---
title: "Is it agentic enough? Benchmarking open models on your own tooling"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/is-it-agentic-enough/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: lysandre
- user: SaylorTwift
---

# Is it agentic enough? Benchmarking open models on your own tooling

![Benchmarking transformers revisions across different metrics](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/is-it-agentic-enough/img_6.png)
<p align="center">
  <em>Benchmarking transformers revisions across different metrics</em>
</p>
<br/>

> This is a human-made, agent-focused blogpost.

Coding agents increasingly work with our software instead of us: describe a task, and the agent picks the library,
writes the calls, runs them, and debugs its own mistakes. When the library gets in the way, it will
happily bypass it and rewrite the logic from scratch. This introduces a new concept in library development:
the code should not only be correct and fast, but should be designed so that an agent can drive it. A clunky API
or stale docs annoys us developers, but it now also sends the agent down a longer, more expensive path.

> Most benchmark focus on the final answer and stop. We wanted to understand the entire process, designed for 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Most benchmarks focus on the final answer and stop. We wanted to understand the entire process, designed for 
```

our specific tools. For every run, the whole trace: the turns, tokens, time it took, whether it errored, and which 
code path it used, measured across many models and agents, library revisions, and tasks. We built that harness and ran 
it on `transformers` as our case study, but it's deliberately tool-agnostic: point it at any library with a command-line entry

> point and you get the same view.

Reviewer 4: I find this paragraph a bit confusing. Are you trying to say you build a benchmark or a harness? 

Here, I would describe what happened succinctly and then unpack that in later paragraphs. As you mostly do on line 35.

We're entering an era where open models and open-source tooling can be used to work with our open-source 
libraries. The question is no longer "can the agent get the right answer?" but "how do we optimize our tooling

> so that agents get the right answer faster". 

Reviewer 4: I don't read the relationship between these two sentences. I assume that you want to say something about how resource cost is more important for open models, but I'm not sure.

Here, we will introduce a tool specific benchmark focusing on how the answer was found, and provide a simple 
implementation of one such harness, running entirely on open models driven by the
[pi](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@mariozechner/pi-coding-agent) coding agent, with the full sweep of
models × revisions × tasks fanned out across [Hugging Face Jobs](https://huggingface.co/docs/huggingface_hub/guides/jobs)
so every run sees identical hardware.

<br/>
<p align="center">
    But, <b><i>how do you optimize software for agents?</i></b>
</p>
<br/>

> We're strong believers in the following two software principles:

Reviewer 4: You could start with this (L47-57). It's far bolder than the current intro.

with a few changes: a CLI, a Skill, and self-contained, task-specific examples. This is the same recipe
recently applied to the [`hf` CLI, redesigned to be agent-optimized](https://huggingface.co/blog/hf-cli-for-agents),
where agents used 1.3–1.8× (and up to 6×) fewer tokens. We wanted to know whether that kind of win generalizes, and
whether it could be useful for transformers as well.

Intuition is a powerful tool, but we wanted more evidence before we opened PRs that add several thousand lines of code to such a widely used codebase as `transformers`. We set out to measure what success looks like.

### Not all successes are equal

Two agents can both produce the correct label for a sentiment-classification task,
but one:

- writes a 40-line Python script, imports `transformers`, debugs a shape error,
  re-runs twice, and finally prints the answer;

while the other

- types `transformers classify --model ... --text "..."` and is done in one call.

Both reach `POSITIVE (0.9999)`, and here are the two paths an agent actually took on this exact task:

```diff
# Task: classify the sentiment of "I absolutely loved the movie, it was fantastic!"

> - # one agent: install deps, write a script, run it, parse the output

Reviewer 4: You could use the (nasty) stdin approach that claude likes:

```sh
python - <<'PY'
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModelForSequenceClassification
import torch
import torch.nn.functional as F

model = AutoModelForSequenceClassification.from_pretrained("distilbert/distilbert-base-uncased-finetuned-sst-2-english")
tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("distilbert/distilbert-base-uncased-finetuned-sst-2-english")
inputs = tokenizer("I absolutely loved the movie, it was fantastic!", return_tensors="pt")

with torch.no_grad():
    logits = model(**inputs).logits

probs = F.softmax(logits, dim=1)
idx = torch.argmax(probs, dim=1).item()
print(model.config.id2label[idx], probs[0][idx].item())
PY
```

- import torch
- import torch.nn.functional as F
-
- model = AutoModelForSequenceClassification.from_pretrained("distilbert/distilbert-base-uncased-finetuned-sst-2-english")
- tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("distilbert/distilbert-base-uncased-finetuned-sst-2-english")
- inputs = tokenizer("I absolutely loved the movie, it was fantastic!", return_tensors="pt")
- with torch.no_grad():
-     logits = model(**inputs).logits
- probs = F.softmax(logits, dim=1)
- idx = torch.argmax(probs, dim=1).item()
- print(model.config.id2label[idx], probs[0][idx].item())

+ # the other agent: one command
+ transformers classify \
+   --model distilbert/distilbert-base-uncased-finetuned-sst-2-english \
+   --text "I absolutely loved the movie, it was fantastic!"
```

Both methods reach the same result. But they have very different profiles in **cost, latency, token usage, and failures**.

If your evaluation only checks the final string, you're blind to these as well as
whether a change you shipped to the library (a CLI improvement, better error messages, a
Skill) actually helped agents.

Our goal with this harness is to evaluate how much work

> an agent has to do to perform a given task, and measure what changes to the library actually help

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
an agent has to do to perform a given task, and whether changes to the library improve performance.
```

them out.

### How do we run evaluations?

A few words on how we'll evaluate agents here.

We run every task under three variants (or "tiers"); three different ways an agent can come at `transformers`:

```text
bare     pip install transformers, and nothing else
clone    the full transformers source, checked out in the working directory
skill    a packaged Skill: the CLI's docs + task examples, loaded in context
```

These aren't nested: `skill` doesn't contain `clone` (it ships curated docs, not the source tree), and neither
strictly contains the other, each gives the agent a different kind of help. As we'll see, a model can sometimes 
do better on `clone` than on `skill`.

A few more choices:

- For now we only focus on deterministic tasks which can provide an exact match, as they provide a very nice ground for experimentation. Model-as-a-judge and other schemes are the obvious next steps for other tasks.
- Every run is its own Hugging Face Job: one per (model × revision × task), so the whole sweep runs in parallel on identical hardware, which keeps the comparison fair at scale.

> - Results and traces land in a Hugging Face Bucket: fast, no versioning needed, and happy with very high write concurrency.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Results and traces land in a Hugging Face Bucket: fast, no versioning needed, and handles very high write concurrency.
```

### Which models to benchmark against?

Not all models driving agents are equal, and their difference changes what you should look at when running them.

> *Frontier*

Reviewer 3: I’m a bit worried about how “frontier” is used in the post. For some readers, “frontier models” means the closed, leading-edge systems that everyone benchmarks against, not necessarily the largest open models, for wikipedia it's the ones that have the potential to "possess dangerous capabilities sufficient to pose severe risks to public safety." https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Foundation_model

I would avoid it and use something like “large open models” / “strong open models” instead.

At one end, you have the largest, most capable open models. On reasonably common tasks,
these should get the right answer, eventually. For them, __"match %"__ saturates near

> 100% and stops telling you much about your tool; a more interesting benchmark is the effort

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
100% and stops telling you much about your tool; a more relevant benchmark is the effort
```

it took the agent to get there: how many turns, tokens and seconds it took, and whether they walked a clean
path or used deprecated APIs.

*Local*

Local models vary widely in size, and so do their abilities.

> Metrics such as __"match %"__ are way more interesting than for their larger counterparts,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Metrics such as __"match %"__ are more relevant than for their larger counterparts,
```

as you can see how model sizes/capabilities affect results on your specific
tool.

> This harness not only provides you guidance, as a library maintainer, on how to update your repository so that agents can better interact with it; it also helps assess how different agents and models perform on the tasks your users care about.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This harness not only provides guidance to library maintainers on how to improve a repository for agent interactions, it also helps assess how different agents and models perform on the tasks users care about.
```

The harness scores every run on several axes, so that you can ask what actually matters
for each class of model:

- **match %**: did the final answer contain the expected result (per-task,
  case-insensitive substring / regex / exact, all explicit in the report);
- **median time** and **median tokens** (new vs. cached vs. generated);
- **runs with error %**: including a guard that flags runs which produced *nothing*
  (0 output tokens, no tool calls, no answer) so silent failures don't masquerade
  as "0";
- **marker adoption**: tool-defined behavior markers; see below for an explanation
  of what this is.

> All of it lands in a report you can directly examine:

Reviewer 3: the frame does not render for me in the preview. I assume that'll work once published.

in any case, at this point in teh blog post I would not mind a recap to grasp the methodology e.g. `we vary four things: model, transformers revision, task, and tier` etc

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/is-it-agentic-enough/img_4.png" alt="CLI adoption across all models" width="85%"><br>
  <em>CLI adoption across all models</em>
</p>

CLI adoption is new: the CLI lands in a single commit, isn't in any model's training data, and is only
lightly documented. The effect is clear: it's the Skill variant, the one that ships the CLI's
documentation, that actually reaches for it, at 55.3%.

### Is the CLI + Skill commit helping?

Comparing the commit across model sizes, the CLI + Skill helps the bigger models: on the `skill` tier, Kimi and the other large agents reach for the CLI and finish in fewer turns. (On `clone` they spend *more* input tokens first - reading the new CLI code, as we saw above - so the win shows up in time and turns, not raw tokens.)

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/is-it-agentic-enough/img_5.png" alt="Kimi-K2.6, GLM-5.1, and MiniMax-M2.7 across revisions" width="85%"><br>
  <em>Kimi-K2.6, GLM-5.1, and MiniMax-M2.7 across revisions</em>
</p>

> But it somehow seems to **hurt the smaller models**. Our intuition is that small models lean

Reviewer 3: s/Our intuition/One plausible explanation

makes it clearer that this is an interpretation from traces, not directly proven by the benchmarrk

Reviewer 3: also, I would rephrase with

But in some smaller-model settings, it appears to hurt performance..

ends up breaking the small ones, which seemed a bit counterintuitive to us at first and something we'd likely have
shipped as-is.

## Trying it yourself

The harness is one CLI, `ag`. Install it, run a suite, fan it out across models × revisions on HF Jobs, and publish the
report as a Hugging Face Space. 

> [!WARNING]
> **Trusted local use only.** The harness runs a coding agent with bypassed permissions and executes code from
> whatever revision you point it at, and traces can contain prompts, output, and local paths. See
> [SECURITY.md](https://github.com/huggingface/is-it-agentic-enough/blob/main/SECURITY.md) before pointing it at code you didn't write or sharing results.

The full, kept-current setup and usage instructions live in the [README](https://github.com/huggingface/is-it-agentic-enough).

## Closing

Checking the final answer tells you whether an agent *can* use your library. It
doesn't tell you what it costs: the turns, tokens, errors, and the path it took to
get there. This harness measures that, across the revisions and models you pick.

On `transformers`, it caught something we'd have shipped on faith: the CLI + Skill

> helps frontier models and hurts the smallest ones. Worth knowing before merging!

Reviewer 3: I think that is one key finding, and strong point of the blog post, I think we should add one actionable takeaway here for library maintainers.
I asked ai to come up with a nice sentence:

"agent-facing APIs should be evaluated across model sizes, because a new affordance can reduce work for strong models while adding ambiguity for smaller ones."

---
title: "Is it agentic enough? Benchmarking open models on your own tooling"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/is-it-agentic-enough/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: lysandre
- user: SaylorTwift
---

# Is it agentic enough? Benchmarking open models on your own tooling

![Benchmarking transformers revisions across different metrics](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/is-it-agentic-enough/img_6.png)
<p align="center">
  <em>Benchmarking transformers revisions across different metrics</em>
</p>
<br/>

> This is a human-made, agent-focused blogpost.

Coding agents increasingly work with our software instead of us: describe a task, and the agent picks the library,
writes the calls, runs them, and debugs its own mistakes. When the library gets in the way, it will
happily bypass it and rewrite the logic from scratch. This introduces a new concept in library development:

> the code should not only be correct and fast, but should be designed so that an agent can drive it. A clunky API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the code should not only be correct and fast, but should be designed so that an agent can drive it effectively. A clunky API
```

Not sure, perhaps too much?

> or stale docs annoys us developers, but it now also sends the agent down a longer, more expensive path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or stale docs annoy us developers, but it now also sends the agent down a longer, more expensive path.
```

> Most benchmarks stop at the final answer. We wanted the whole process instead: not just whether the agent got

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most benchmarks just look at the final answer. We wanted the whole process instead: not just whether the agent got
```

it right, but how much work it took to get there, and how that shifts across models, library revisions, and
tasks. We measured exactly that, using `transformers` as our case study.

We're entering an era where open models, open-source tooling, and our open-source libraries make up a stack we
can shape end to end. That changes the question a maintainer should ask: not "can the agent get the right

> answer?" (it usually can) but "how do we shape our tooling so it gets there with less work?". 

Reviewer: I like this paragraph, but I feel the point has already been made. One option would be to open with this (and replace the first paragraph), or maybe just remove?

> Here, we will introduce a tool specific benchmark focusing on how the answer was found, and provide a simple 

Reviewer: Maybe some sort of divider before this? The motivation is quite good in the previous intro, perhaps we can use a section title for the specifics, or maybe just a horizontal line.

We run every task under three variants (or "tiers"); three different ways an agent can come at `transformers`:

```text
bare     pip install transformers, and nothing else
clone    the full transformers source, checked out in the working directory
skill    a packaged Skill: the CLI's docs + task examples, loaded in context
```

These aren't nested: `skill` doesn't contain `clone` (it ships curated docs, not the source tree), and neither
strictly contains the other, each gives the agent a different kind of help. As we'll see, a model can sometimes 
do better on `clone` than on `skill`.

A few more choices:

- For now we only focus on deterministic tasks which can provide an exact match, as they provide a very nice ground for experimentation. Model-as-a-judge and other schemes are the obvious next steps for other tasks.
- Every run is its own Hugging Face Job: one per (model × revision × task), so the whole sweep runs in parallel on identical hardware, which keeps the comparison fair at scale.
- Results and traces land in a Hugging Face Bucket: fast, no versioning needed, and handles very high write concurrency.

### Which models to benchmark against?

> Not all models driving agents are equal, and their difference changes what you should look at when running them.

Reviewer: Comment on the Space, for a future revision: have a quick way to select the large models versus the small ones. Or maybe just separate them visually in the sidebar.

*Large open models*

At one end, you have the largest, most capable open models. On reasonably common tasks,

> these should get the right answer, eventually. For them, __"match %"__ saturates near

Reviewer: Maybe call this "accuracy" or "task completion" since we haven't introduced the metric yet?

  case-insensitive substring / regex / exact, all explicit in the report);
- **median time** and **median tokens** (new vs. cached vs. generated);
- **runs with error %**: including a guard that flags runs which produced *nothing*
  (0 output tokens, no tool calls, no answer) so silent failures don't masquerade
  as "0";
- **marker adoption**: tool-defined behavior markers; see below for an explanation
  of what this is.

All of it lands in a report you can directly examine:

<p align="center">
<iframe
	src="https://transformers-community-is-transformers-agentic.static.hf.space"
	frameborder="0"
	width="850"
	height="450"
></iframe>
<br>
  <em>The live report: Overview, Coverage, and Results, all client-side.
  (Not loading? <a href="https://transformers-community-is-transformers-agentic.static.hf.space">open it in a new tab</a>.)</em>
</p>

And because it captures the native agent trace of every run, numbers are just the beginning: you
can read exactly what the agent did, command by command. The traces are shareable
through the Hub's [agent-traces viewer](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/agent-traces):

<p align="center">

>   <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/is-it-agentic-enough/img_11.png" alt="A run rendered in the Hub's agent-traces viewer: MiniMax-M2.7 on the answer-question task" width="85%"><br>

Reviewer: This image is a bit low-res to me. It's probably fine when embedded in the blog post.

  <em>A run rendered in the Hub's agent-traces viewer: MiniMax-M2.7 on the answer-question task.</em><br>
  <a href="https://huggingface.co/buckets/lysandre/transformers-agentic-use/tree/traces/22404f7951/pi/MiniMaxAI--MiniMax-M2.7/bare__answer-question__run1.jsonl"><b>Open this trace on the Hub ↗</b></a>
</p>

Before the results, a quick recap of the setup. Each run varies four things: the **model** driving the agent,
the **`transformers` revision** it runs against, the **task**, and the **tier** (`bare` / `clone` / `skill`).
The two experiments below each hold some of these fixed and sweep one; and the two classes of model call for

> different ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As discussed, we look at different metrics for the two different model categories.
```

### Large open models: hold the model, vary the revision

Since a large open model will usually get to the correct result, what you're really
measuring is the effort it took to do so. Did it take ten turns or one? Did it follow
an API path you deprecated because it trusted obsolete documentation? Did it hit an
error you hadn't foreseen?

The natural experiment is to fix one strong model and vary the tool's
revisions: the successive git versions of `transformers` we test against, from released tags like
`v5.8.0` and `v5.9.0` to the specific commit that introduces the CLI and Skill. We want to watch whether the load
it puts on the agent goes up or down. We used the harness on `transformers` to check
whether adding a dedicated CLI and Skill actually lightened the agents' work.

For the three large models we used in our tests, the average time spent on all tasks indicates that the Skill commit
results in less time spent working on the tasks:

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/is-it-agentic-enough/img_13.png" alt="Median time per revision, by tier" width="85%"><br>

>   <em>Median time per revision, by tier: the skill commit (green) is the fastest.</em>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <em>Median time per revision, by tier: the skill commit (green dot) is the fastest.</em>
```

CLI's implementation and a set of `cli/agentic/*.py` usage examples into the repository directly. 

On the `clone` variant the agent has a full transformers checkout in front of it, and roughly a third of the runs go read the new
surface (the `/cli/` tree and the example scripts) to learn the interface before calling it. This raises the
median input from ~4k to ~6.4k tokens. 

The two charts are then two sides of one tradeoff: the commit buys the large models less time 
(they reach for the CLI instead of debugging Python) at the cost of more
tokens (they read the code that taught them the CLI). A tradeoff worth knowing about before merging PRs.

One caveat works in the CLI's favor, though, which isn't benchmarked yet: the cost of reading it is amortized 
with successive runs. Our setup is built for one-off experiments. Each run is a fresh agent that rediscovers 
the CLI from scratch, so it pays the discovery cost every time. In real usage an agent learns the interface 
once and then solves task after task within the same session, amortizing that cost across many requests. The
token bump we measure here is closer to a worst case than to what a user would see day to day.

---

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Small models: hold the revision, vary the model

Open models give us fine-grained control over the variables that matter most here: size, configuration, quantization,
provider, training, and anything that would differ from one model to the next. They're also where a good tool surface
matters most: a small model asked to "use `transformers` to do X" on a `bare` environment can
guess an API that changed some releases ago, may do unnecessary tool calls, and can
get the wrong answer.

So here the experiment is the opposite of the above: hold the revision and sweep the model. This helps
see which models actually take care of the task, not just by token count and time,
but down to which ones can't reliably handle the tool calls. Our intuition is
that the smaller the model, the harder both tool use and the task get; we ran the
harness across a range of model sizes to test exactly that:

<p align="center">

>   <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/is-it-agentic-enough/img_14.png" alt="Match % across models, by tier" width="85%"><br>

Reviewer: Yeah, much clearer with the labels 🙌

report as a Hugging Face Space. 

> [!WARNING]
> **Trusted local use only.** The harness runs a coding agent with bypassed permissions and executes code from
> whatever revision you point it at, and traces can contain prompts, output, and local paths. See
> [SECURITY.md](https://github.com/huggingface/is-it-agentic-enough/blob/main/SECURITY.md) before pointing it at code you didn't write or sharing results.

The full, kept-current setup and usage instructions live in the [README](https://github.com/huggingface/is-it-agentic-enough).

## Closing

Checking the final answer tells you whether an agent *can* use your library. It
doesn't tell you what it costs: the turns, tokens, errors, and the path it took to
get there. This harness measures that, across the revisions and models you pick.

On `transformers`, it caught something we'd have shipped on faith: the CLI + Skill
helps the largest open models and hurts the smallest ones. Worth knowing before merging!

It's profile-based, and designed to be adaptable: point it at your own library, define
a few tasks and their expected answers, get the same report. Code and tasks are in

> the [repo](https://github.com/huggingface/is-it-agentic-enough), traces are on the Hub!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the [repo](https://github.com/huggingface/is-it-agentic-enough), traces are on the Hub.
Let us know if you use it for your project!
```

Perhaps?
